find apps that need rosetta guide (#47862)
fleetdm/fleet: articles/find-apps-that-need-rosetta-before-macos-27.md

# Find apps that need Rosetta before macOS 27

> Apple is closing the door on Rosetta 2\. macOS 27, due in fall 2026, runs only on Apple silicon and removes Rosetta 2 during the upgrade if it was already installed. Users can reinstall it on demand, but macOS 27 is the last release with full Rosetta support. macOS 28, expected in fall 2027, drops it for almost every app. Apple laid out this timeline at WWDC 2026\. See [Apple's Rosetta documentation](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/apple-silicon/about-the-rosetta-translation-environment) for the details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apple is closing the door on Rosetta 2\. macOS 27, due in fall 2026, runs only on Apple silicon and removes Rosetta 2 during the upgrade if it was already installed. Users can reinstall it on demand, but macOS 27 is the last release with full Rosetta support. macOS 28, expected in fall 2027, drops it for almost every app. Apple committed to this timeline at WWDC 2025 and confirmed the macOS 27 specifics at WWDC 2026\. See [Apple's Rosetta documentation](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/apple-silicon/about-the-rosetta-translation-environment) for the details.
```

> If your fleet runs any Intel-only Mac apps, find them now. You have a full release cycle to test replacements before the apps stop working. This post covers three ways to find Rosetta-dependent apps with osquery and Fleet, and two mistakes that will give you wrong answers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your fleet runs any Intel-only Mac apps, find them now. You have a full release cycle to test replacements before the apps stop working. This post covers three ways to find Rosetta-dependent apps with osquery and Fleet, plus the dead end you'll hit if you check the wrong place and the gotcha that will misclassify Apple's own apps.
```

## The signal you want

An app needs Rosetta when its executable is Intel-only. On an Apple silicon Mac, a binary with an `x86_64` slice and no `arm64` slice runs under Rosetta. A universal binary carries both slices and runs native. An Apple silicon-native binary carries only `arm64`.

> So the question for each app is simple: does its executable include an `arm64` slice? If not, it needs Rosetta.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So the question for each app is simple: does its executable include an `arm64` slice? If not, it needs Rosetta.

One edge case to keep in mind: a universal app can still need Rosetta if it loads Intel-only frameworks, plugins, or helper binaries. The methods below check the main executable, so apps with Intel-only plugins inside a universal host (common in audio production tools) may pass the audit but still fail under macOS 28.
```

## What does not work: the app bundle

Each macOS app ships an `Info.plist` with metadata, so the architecture seems like it should live there too. It does not. We queried the `plist` table for an `NSExecutableArchitectures` key across `/Applications` and got nothing back. The join worked and the plist read fine, but the key is not there.

macOS reads the executable architecture from the Mach-O header at launch, not from `Info.plist`. The architecture has to come from the binary itself, or from an index that already read it. Both options follow.

## Method 1: what is running under Rosetta right now

The fastest signal is to ask which processes are running translated at this moment. The `processes` table has a `translated` column on macOS: `1` means the process runs under Rosetta, `0` means native, and `-1` means osquery could not tell.

```sql
SELECT pid, name, path FROM processes WHERE translated = 1;
```

> This shows active usage, which is the best signal for what your users depend on. One caveat: a translated osquery process cannot detect that it is itself translated. Fleet runs fleetd and osquery natively on Apple silicon, so this does not affect your results, and every other translated process reports correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This shows active usage, which is the best signal for what your users depend on. One caveat: a translated osquery process cannot detect that it is itself translated. Fleet's fleetd and osquery run native on Apple silicon, so this caveat does not affect your results. A native osquery detects translated processes correctly.
```

## Method 3: a fallback for hosts without Spotlight

The `mdfind` method depends on Spotlight. If indexing is off, or `/Applications` is excluded from the index, `mdfind` returns fewer results than the truth. Some managed fleets disable Spotlight, so plan for it.

For those hosts, read the Mach-O header with `lipo` in a script and deploy it with Fleet. Match on the `arm64` substring so `arm64e` counts as native:

```shell
for app in /Applications/*.app; do
  exe="$app/Contents/MacOS/$(defaults read "$app/Contents/Info.plist" CFBundleExecutable 2>/dev/null)"
  if [ -f "$exe" ]; then
    archs=$(lipo -archs "$exe" 2>/dev/null)
    if [ -n "$archs" ] && ! echo "$archs" | grep -q 'arm64'; then
      echo "NEEDS ROSETTA: $(basename "$app") [$archs]"
    fi
  fi
done
```

`grep -q 'arm64'` matches both `arm64` and `arm64e`, so universal apps clear the check. Run this against the same Mac as the `mdfind` query and compare the two lists. If the script finds apps that `mdfind` missed, that host has a Spotlight indexing gap, and the script is your source of truth there.

## Turn this into a fleet-wide check

> Add the `processes` and `mdfind` queries to Fleet as scheduled queries or policies, then review the results across your Apple silicon hosts. Once you know which apps need Rosetta, you have two jobs before macOS 27 reaches your fleet:
> 
> 1. Decide which Intel-only apps to keep. Replace the rest with native or universal builds.
> 2. For the apps you keep, reinstall Rosetta after the macOS 27 upgrade, since the upgrade removes it. Script the reinstall with `softwareupdate --install-rosetta --agree-to-license` and deploy it through Fleet.
> 
> Start the audit while macOS 26 and macOS 27 still run Rosetta. That gives you a full release cycle to test replacements before macOS 28 removes it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Save the `processes` and `mdfind` queries in Fleet to inventory Intel-only apps across your Apple silicon hosts. If you also want a yes/no compliance signal you can automate against, add a policy that inverts the question. For example, a policy that fails when any Intel-only apps remain in `/Applications`. If you manage Fleet configuration in Git, define the queries, policy, and reinstall script as YAML and apply them with `fleetctl gitops`. The audit ships and rolls back like any other change in your repo.

Once you know which apps need Rosetta, you have two jobs before macOS 27 reaches your fleet:

1. Decide which Intel-only apps to keep. Replace the rest with native or universal builds.
2. For the apps you keep, you'll need to reinstall Rosetta after the macOS 27 upgrade. Use Fleet's policy automation to handle this without manual steps. Write a policy that fails when Rosetta is missing on macOS 27, then attach the reinstall script (`softwareupdate --install-rosetta --agree-to-license`) as the policy's automated remediation. Fleet runs the script on every host that fails the policy, and stops once the host passes.

Start the audit while macOS 26 and macOS 27 still run Rosetta. That gives you a full release cycle to test replacements before macOS 28 removes it.
```

Covers review items P2-3, P2-4, P2-5

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If you want help wiring this audit and the auto-remediation into your environment, [contact us](https://fleetdm.com/contact).

```
